we got James D Eugenio here he's the
publisher and editor of Kennedy's and
King comm it's a great website with tons
of information on a lot of Cold War
history the assassinations of the 60s
and a lot of interesting book reviews
and things like that so he's here today
and we're going to talk about the United
States involvement in Vietnam and a lot
about Kennedy's involvement in that war
as well so thank you Jim for speaking
today sure and I I guess I should add
that one of the reasons that I'm doing
this and one of the reasons that I wrote
the four part essay is because I was so
disappointed in the Ken Burns Lynn
Novick colossal 18 hour ten part
documentary series that was on PBS I
felt like it was a squandered
opportunity and so our site became one
of the big critical focuses of that
disappointing series and I'm going to
take that further with you in this
interview great let's just start from
the beginning um what's the history of
United States involvement in in Vietnam
okay to understand how the heck the
United States got bogged down in this
horrible disaster and that ended up at
an epic tragedy for both the people of
Vietnam and a large part of the American
population it goes back to what
historians and I always like to take an
historical viewpoint of things because I
think that's the most accurate way to
understand something like this the
French during what we call the second
age of imperialism historians the first
age of imperialism or colonialism took
place in the late 1400s early 1500s when
some of the great powers of Europe to
Dutch the French the British and the
Portuguese and the Spanish started to
carve up the Western Hemisphere
alright now this what we call the second
age of imperialism took place from about
the 1800s in the early eighteen hundreds
of the latter part of the 1800s when the
French and the British to a lesser part
are the Germans and the Belgians began
to occupy areas of
and Asia now the French involvement in
Vietnam began as a kind of religious
missionary movement to convert the
people of Indochina to Catholicism and
as that picked up steam as time went on
it became a kind of commercial
relationship that is the French built a
factory there and they began to have
trade agreements by about the late 1850s
the French had a military attache there
and they began to attack the province of
Danang and they created a kind of a
colonial region in the southern part of
Vietnam called Cochin China that spread
gradually over the next few years into
the central region and then finally the
northern region which they called Aman
and then they began to spread it out
even further westward into Cambodia and
Laos and so this is how the French
Empire which we called Indochina that's
how it started and it lasted there of
course until the fall of the French
government to the Germans in the early
part of World War two when Paris fell
the Japanese went in filled the vacuum
and then at the end of World War two
President Franklin Roosevelt had made it
clear before he died that he did not
want the French to go back in to
Indochina
after the war he even asked the Chinese
Nationalist government you know if they
would rather go in instead to prevent
the French from going back in they said
no and so he made it clear that he did
not want any more colonial powers going
back in and taking up the places they
had before the war unfortunately our
Roosevelt passed away shortly after that
and as the Japanese left the British
came in and they allowed the French to
come in behind them and re-establish
their government in Vietnam except now
there was an organized rebellion against
this led by this guy named Ho Chi Minh
and Ho Chi Minh tried to negotiate with
the fur
when that didn't work he decided to
organize opposition forces to the French
as they began to try and reoccupy
cochin-china
now there was a fellow and then by the
way this was extraordinary to me that
the burns Novik series left the figure
of bow died completely out of the
picture I don't even think they
mentioned him once but but bode I had
been the French figurehead okay in
Vietnam and what really kind of
escalated the conflict between Ho Chi
Minh and the French was the fact the
French now wanted to bring back bode i
ho chi minh got really furious at this
because he figured well look if that's
what they're designed to do and what
they're going to do was to create
another colonial empire er because I
know that bowtie is nothing but a
figurehead he's not going to get
democracy or self-government to the
Vietnamese people at all and so that
began what's usually referred to is the
first Indochina war what happened here
of course is that once the Chinese and
the Russians decided to stand by Ho Chi
Minh when he declared his opposition to
Bo die Dean Acheson Truman's Secretary
of State he saw that as a movement
towards communism and this really shows
you how crazy the times were you know
and this was a this was a huge problem
back then in those days that this whole
idea that the Dulles brothers put out
and advocated for it and Acheson
proceeded the Dulles brothers but he he
had a lot of their trademarks in
diplomacy the idea was this you had to
be on our side and if you weren't on our
side you were against us which simply
meant that there was going to be no
neutrality we're not going to go ahead
and allow third world nations to pick
their own path and as we'll see this
will be a serious point of contention
when Kennedy comes to power because he
disagreed with that policy so that when
the French now pick up these cans that
the United States will support them they
begin to escalate the war
and Atchison and Truman now begin to
finance a large part of the French
military effort to retake Vietnam and
Indochina this goes on for a couple of
years but dan in the election of 1952
when Eisenhower takes over and the
Dulles brothers come to power Foster
Dulles at State Department and Allen
Dulles as director of the CIA first
deputy director then director of the CIA
the aide to the French gets astronomical
okay it goes up by a factor of about ten
till by the last year of the war in 1954
the United States is literally dumping
hundreds of millions of dollars in
military aid you know supplies etc into
the French effort to maintain control of
Indochina now John Foster Dulles brought
Addison's ideas in the third world to a
point that I don't even think a person
would agree with John Foster Dulles was
extremely extremely ideological about
this whole issue he simply would not
tolerate any kind of neutrality by any
new leader in the third world and this
is why he and his brother then began to
back the French attempt to a really
incredible degree until by the last year
of the war like late 1953 early 1954 the
United States was more or less financing
about 80 percent of the French war
effort and on top of that because they
were footing the bill they would not
even allow the French negotiate a way
out because the French actually wanted
to do that in 1952 or 1953 the French
were going to negotiate a way out of
this dilemma but Dulles would not
tolerate it and so the war went on until
the French made a last desperate
strategic gamble to win the war in 1954
and that of course was the Battle of
Dien Bien Phu before we go into the den
food okay go ahead why were the Dulles
brothers was this purely an ideological
thing they were pushing or did the
United States that we already have
business there was it an economic
- what was the push for getting so
deeply involved with France UM's yes
that's correct
it was not just ideological because the
Dulles brothers prior to becoming parts
of the government had pretty high
positions in one of the giant at that
time it was probably the predominant
corporate law firm in the United States
called Sullivan & Cromwell in fact John
Foster Dulles was actually the managing
partner there and he brought his younger
brother Alan in as a senior partner so
it's not completely correct to say that
this was all ideological because it
wasn't a large part of this was for
commercial reasons in the sense that a
lot of the clients that the Sullivan and
Cromwell law firm represented had these
large business interests in all
different parts of the globe and
sometimes this included third world
countries so that's another reason of
course that dollars the Dulles brothers
were so intense upon putting down this
rebellion against the French attempt to
recolonize the area because to them
it was an it was an example of of the
industrial or already commercialized
Western powers going ahead and
exploiting cheap labor and cheatsheet
materials in the third world and that's
what in large part that's what that law
firm represented so that's absolutely
correct it was not just ideological it
was also a commercial view of the world
and what the Dulles brothers stood for
in relation to the use of the natural
resources in the third world now what
happened at the end Ben foo and I don't
think that burns Novik film really
explained this as well it should have is
that the French under Henry Navarre
decided that they were losing the
guerrilla war so they decided to try and
pull out the North Vietnamese forces led
by General gear
into a more open-air kind of a
battleground and so they took over this
low-lying Valley in the northern part of
Vietnam not very far from the western
border and their strategic idea was to
get involved in a large-scale battle
where they would be able to use their
airpower and overpowering artillery to
crush the ups forces well it didn't work
out that way for a number of reasons but
one of them was that the Russians went
ahead and transported these huge siege
cannon to gia and gia used literally
tens of thousands of civilian supporters
to transport these huge siege guns up
this incline overlooking DN Ben foo and
they began to bombard the airfield there
which negated a lot of the military
advantage that the French thought they
were gonna be able to use when that
started happening John Foster Dulles
began to arrange direct American aid men
I'm talking about military aid he
actually began to go ahead and give them
fighter planes which he had them
repainted and dramas French insignia run
by CIA pilots I think they're about
twenty four of them did he let them use
and then when that didn't work then he
went ahead and started giving them large
imports of other weapons you know to try
and see if they could hold off the siege
it was going to come finally when that
didn't work Denny arranged for operation
vulture an operation vulture was the
arrangement of a giant air Armada it was
originally planned as something like if
I recall correctly 60 small bombers a
hundred and fifty jet fighters in case
in case the Chinese intervened and also
three I think there were be 36 convey
airplanes to carry three atomic bombs
Dallas could not
is through Eisenhower I never refused to
agree to it because the British had
turned him down he didn't want to do
this by himself and so even though
Dulles tried to convince the British to
help they turned him down twice
so then Dulles in a very straight very
strange thing he actually offered it the
atomic bombs to the French our Foreign
Secretary but all Georgia adult in a
separate private exchange which is a
really remarkable thing to do because
I've never been able to find any
evidence that Eisenhower knew about that
so that's how desperate he was not to
see the unban booth fall but the French
refused okay because the guy said the
guy said straight to Foster Dulles he
says if I use those I'm gonna kill as
many as my troops as I will general G
ops and so DN Ben foo fell and at this
point two things happen that will more
or less ensure American involvement in
Vietnam at the subsequent peace
conference in Geneva Switzerland it's
very clear that the United States is
calling the shots
secondly when the British and Russian
see that they advise Ho Chi Minh to go
along with whatever the Western powers
leaned towards if not they fear that the
Americans will intervene immediately and
in fact Richard Nixon in a private talk
he did with America newspaper editors he
actually floated the idea of using
American ground troops to actually
intervene at the unbend Phu so what
happens now is that John Foster Dulles
goes ahead and orally agrees that there
will be general elections held in two
years in 1956 and whoever wins will then
unify Vietnam he didn't sign it because
a lawyer that he was understood that
that would expose him later but he did
advise his representative at the
conference to go ahead and say they will
abide by that
decision and now this begins for all
intents and purposes the American
intervention in Vietnam and it begins by
and this is really incredible to me the
Byrnes Novick series never mentioned ed
Lansdale and how you can make a series
in 18-hour series about Vietnam an
American involvement there and not
mention Lansdale is mind-boggling they
did show his picture but they didn't say
his name because the reason it's so
mind-boggling is that Allen Dulles now
made Lansdale more or less the action
officer for the whole Vietnam enterprise
in other words the objective was number
one to create an American state in South
Vietnam and number two to prop up an
American chosen leader to be the more or
less American president of this new
state and so Lansdale did it and he did
it you know taya you know it's it's it's
an incredible achievement what he did
because he set up his giant
psychological propaganda campaign that
scared the heck out of all the Catholics
because the French had occupied the
country the whole country we're talking
this is right the French were fighting
over North Vietnam South Vietnam this
was not split into two countries until
this point right right and so they had
converted a lot of the people there to
the Catholic religion and so what
happens is that now
Lansdale has this great psychological
propaganda war saying that ho chi minh
is now going to slaughter all the
catholic residents in north vietnam and
so literally hundreds of thousands of
these converted vietnamese now begin to
come to the south and and the CIA helps
them by both land and by sea they begin
to transport them to the south because
part of the agreement was that all the
vietnamese would have I think a 36 month
window to move in either direction so
this was a great great propaganda
victory for the Dulles brothers because
they said look all these people are
fleeing the north
you know why because we represent
democracy and the North represents
communist slavery okay now wasn't the
reason at all of course but that's what
they that's how they used it and so then
they found dis to go D on diem guy
before we before we go in ahead and we
talked a little bit about Lanza who's
running under the CIA will be part of
the military see the thing is the reason
I don't think burns and Novick wanted to
introduce Lansdale is because there is
any way in the world that you can talk
about what Lansdale did in South Vietnam
and not bring in the CIA right because
although Lansdale kind of cover as a
brigadier general in the Air Force he
really wasn't an Air Force officer and
he himself admitted this we found some
letters john newman and myself up at the
Hoover Institute near Stanford in which
he essentially admitted that that he was
really working for the CIA the whole
time and he had done a lot of covert
operations most famously in the
Philippines before he was chosen by
Allen Dulles to lead this giant which
I'm pretty sure at that time it was the
biggest CIA operation in their history
of what you know what what he was doing
here with this I pure psychological
warfare to get all these people you know
to come south and if you expose who
Lansdale is there there isn't any way
that you can say that this was not a
cia-run operation this whole idea that
Swart
the whole Geneva agreements number one
and number two to swart the will of the
people of Vietnam because the reason
this was done of course in Eisenhower
admitted this later was that there was
no way in the world that the CIA could
find any kind of a candidate that was
gonna be Ho Chi Minh in a national
election and so the CIA did these polls
and they found out that ho chi minh
would win with probably 75 to 80 percent
of the vote if there was an honest real
election and so that's why the CIA was
under Lansdale decided first to get all
these new people into the sound
and then prop up this new government in
the south to separate it you know from
what they then called Ho Chi Minh's area
in the north now I understand that
didn't exist before France had colonized
the whole country so now you had the
beginning of this entirely new country
created by the CIA you know there's no
other way around that statement you know
and and I really think that the Byrnes
Novik film to be mild really kind of
underplayed that there would have been
no South Vietnam if it had not been for
Lansdale he's a guy who created the
whole country all right and so now they
picked a leader a guy named to go to
indium who was going to be their
opposition to Ho Chi Minh well the
problem with picking ago the indium was
number one he spoke perfect fluent
English number two he dressed like a
westerner that is he you know he wore
sport coats and suits and white shirts
and ties and number three he went at his
haircut like an American and so and his
family was the same thing with his
brother knew and his wife Madame knew
and so how on earth anybody could think
that somehow diem and his family was
gonna win the allegiance of all the
people in Vietnam and win election of
course Wow that wasn't gonna happen
so what Leanna's deal did is and it was
a very you gotta admire the way these
guys think even if OU you don't like the
goals that they achieve the way they do
it is very clever Liam still number one
wanted to get rid of Beau die because he
did not want to have anymore
Kim and him and John Foster Dulles had
agreed they had to get rid of the stigma
of French colonialism and so they
sponsored a phony plebiscite an
up-or-down plebiscite on bringing bow
tie back in 1955 now anybody who
analyzes that election in 1955
will be able to tell you very clearly
that it was a rigged but to give you one
example
both I was not allowed to campaign it
was pretty easy to beat somebody if the
other guy cannot campaign and Lansdale
essentially you know for all practical
purposes you know there's no other way
to say this
he was GM's campaign manager all right
it was CIA money going in and running
his campaign and there's a famous
conversation where Lansdale because he
has all this money because they've
already built up a police force you know
in South Vietnam he essentially tells
him that you know I don't think that we
should make this very blatant you know I
don't think you should win with over 65%
of the vote
well Lansdale decided he should be out
of the country during the actual
election so it wouldn't look too obvious
sodium then went ahead and decided he
wanted to win with over 90 percent of
the votes
and that's what it was rigged for and as
everybody who analyzed that election
knows it was so bad that you actually
had more people voting for your diem in
certain provinces that actually lived
there that's how bad the the ballots
were rigged but it did what they wanted
to do it got rid of both I so now in
famous quote by John Foster Dulles he
said words the effect that good we have
a clean face there now okay without is
without any kind of hint of colonialism
now if you can believe you said that
it's actually true it's one of the most
startling and it shows you the
disconnect between the Dulles brothers
and Eisenhower with the reality that's
on the ground there because diem is
going to be nothing but a losing cause
but now that Jim is in power
Lansdale Dan goes ahead and advises him
to negate the 1956 election and so
that's what happens the agreements that
were made in Geneva we're now canceled
and this is the beginning of two
separate countries you get the North
part of Vietnam led by Ho Chi Minh and
with his capital
oi and you get South Vietnam which is a
complete American creation with his
capital at Saigon led by diem and so by
the end of 1957 and this is another
problem I had with the Byrnes Novik
series they try and say and imply that
the war began under Kennedy simply not
true
and by the way this is something that
Richard Nixon liked to say he liked to
say that well when I became president I
was given this problem by my two
predecessors no not at all
in a latter part of 1957 I think in
either November or December the
leadership in the North Kenoi that is Ho
Chi Minh and laid one and general guy up
they had decided that America they were
now gonna have to go to war with the
United States and they began to make war
plans at that early date and those war
plans were then approved by the Russian
Politburo and both Russia and China
because in some ways it had been their
fault that this had happened by advising
Ho Chi Minh to be meek and mild at the
Geneva Conference they agreed to go
ahead and supply Ho Chi Minh with
weaponry supplies and money and so the
war now begins in the first Indochina
war France against the Vietnamese the
rebels in the south were called the Viet
Minh while now the Vietnam Vietnam now
convert into the Vietcong and so this
rebel force in the South now begins to
materialize again except their enemy is
diem and so now begins the construction
of the Ho Chi Minh Trail which crosses
down through Laos and Cambodia and this
is going to be a supply route to supply
these rebels in the south and to
actually infiltrate troops into the
south the other port the other way
they're going to do it is to a place
called Sein Oakville in southern
Cambodia in which they're going to bring
in supplies by sea and so now for all
intents and purposes the
or now begins in around 1958 there
begins to be hit-and-run raids against a
diem regime in the south and so the
United States now begins to really build
up not just a police force which they
had done before but they now begin to
build up a military attache in the south
and by the end of the Occidental regime
there's something like about if I recall
about 650 military advisers there with a
police force that is trained at Michigan
State University into a under a secret
program the battle in the countryside
now begins in earnest 1958 1959 1960 and
Jim as he begins to be attacked now gets
more and more tyrannical alright he
begins in prison tens of thousands of
suspects in his famous Tiger cages these
bamboo like to buy you know to buy for
cages which people rolled up you know
like cinnamon rolls and kept prisoner
there was literally tens of thousands of
those kinds of prisoners by 1960 and he
actually began the guillotine suspects
in the countryside as more and more this
militarized situation takes place it
begins to show that the idea that the
United States is supporting a democracy
is a farcical idea because it's not a
democracy in the south because
essentially diem the police force is run
by as his brother knew and diem is very
much pro-catholic an anti Buddhist and
unfortunately for the United States
about 70% of the population in South
Vietnam was Buddhist even with the
hundreds of thousands of people who fled
south so the situation and by the way
lands theorists Lansdale was still there
he's still supervising them you know
trying to hold on to this thing because
he has so much invested in it as time
goes on and the situation because more
militarized there actually becomes to be
a coup attempt against diem in 1960
and the American ambassador in Saigon I
think his name was Albert Dubrow he even
lectures damn that you've got to
democratize this country or else you're
gonna be the symbol you know of this
whole militaristic situation and you're
gonna be under a state of siege and this
doesn't work and so that's a situation
that occurs during the election of 1960
with Kennedy versus Nixon that's a
situation that whoever wins that
election is going to be presented with
there's a there's an actual line in here
from lancedale I guess they acknowledged
that this is a fascist state they set up
Lansdale actually said that it's a
famous quote that he said when things
began to spin out of control when you
know around nah you know when things
began to be kind of over at militarized
struggle the 6465 where he said words
are the effect I don't understand these
people who complain about democratic
rights and human rights when I was never
instructed to build that kind of state
you know I was instructed to build a
fascist state and that's what I did talk
about from the horse's mouth that's not
an exact quote but it's pretty much what
he said what happened is that the CIA
sent in completely trained police
officers that were meant to monitor and
surveil any kind of what they perceive
as being subversive opposition to diem
the CIA plan was that we probably can't
control the countryside because it's too
big you know and it's too expansive but
we have to maintain control to big
cities and so they began to issue ID
cards which you know identified the
great majority of the population so they
could begin to keep track of it and then
they began to train the police forces
you know to go ahead and root out
anybody they thought was subversive
you're never gonna get an exact number
of how many people diem put in prison
but the one the most credible numbers
I've seen is about 30,000
that's how big the prison population was
you know anybody who dissented you know
against the diem regime and what made it
worse what made it really almost fatal
was the fact that his brother knew did
not want to tolerate religious freedom
for the Buddhists and so and so you had
this political crushing a political
dissent and then you had his perceived
persecution on a religious grounds and
so it began to be a kind of endless
downward spiral where you know the the
diem regime needed more and more and
more American aid to stay in power
because it could not win you know and
the famous Lyndon Johnson you know
phrase it could not win the hearts and
minds the people and so more and more
Aid began to be funneled in the South
Vietnam it was kind of like an inverse
equation the more the political system
failed the more the military system had
to be escalated if we were going to hang
on to South Vietnam and so that is the
terrible situation that kennedy is
confronted with when he becomes
president when he's inaugurated in
January of 1961 so let's talk about what
Kennedy's initial initial moves were I
mean he had a lot facing him obviously
Cuba was probably more in the news
that's was things happening in Berlin
but how did Kennedy try to try to deal
with Vietnam at the beginning of his
administration well that's exactly right
because Vietnam did not figure very
strongly in the 1960 campaign it was
about the the islands off the coast of
China
Lemoine masu and about Cuba Kennedy
tried to get some things in there about
Africa during the campaign but there
really wasn't a heck of a lot about
Vietnam in the 1960 campaign you know in
fact as we know now the Eisenhower
administration was actually planning for
the secretly planning for the Bay of
Pigs operation now with but Nixon and
Howard hunt
and so when Kennedy becomes president
he's immediately confronted with these
these conditions in South Vietnam and
Edward Lansdale when I think it was a
few days after the inauguration you know
hands him a report about how dire the
situation is in Saigon and he predicts
that if the United States does not
assert itself meaning sending in
American ground troops that the diem
regime is in danger of falling and that
was really the first time that Kennedy
had ever heard such a thing because when
he and Eisenhower had talked they had a
two-day conference to go ahead and
facilitate the transition Kennedy said
that the country needed China that
Eisenhower warned him about was not
Vietnam it was Laos right and so that's
what Kennedy first tried to solve was a
lie ocean situation in which he chose to
put together a kind of neutral a
solution to the problem in 1961 and so
confronted with Vietnam after Lansdale's
report this created a kind of like a
landslide person after person Walt
Rostow Maxwell Taylor but by November of
1961 there's about eight reports on his
desk all encouraging the United States
descending ground troops in the South
Vietnam even McGeorge Bundy his national
security adviser he recommended 25,000
ground troops you know American combat
troops to go ahead and enter into South
Vietnam if must you notice is to save
the country at this point I think it's
necessary to correct another terrible
terrible mischaracterization in the
burns Novick series if you don't
understand who Kennedy was by 1961 then
you cannot in any way presume
what Kennedy did in an honest way from
1961 to 1963 Kennedy was in Vietnam in
1951 as he was getting ready to run for
president he took a trip into Asia he
landed at the Saigon Airport and he
deliberately avoided being briefed by
the French emissaries or representatives
as a French administration of the French
press there and he had a list of people
that he wanted to talk to and one of
them was Edmund gulley on who the film
never mentions they mentioned a New York
Times reporter I think his name was
Seymour topping but it was the going and
meeting that he had that really really
impressed Kennedy because gooey on
simply stated when Kennedy asked him you
said are do we have any chance of
winning this war and golion said no we
don't have any chance of when there's no
way in the world we're gonna win this
thing
he said well how come Galion said that
look
hochi man has fired up the the
Vietnamese population especially the
younger generation to a point that they
would rather die than go back to French
colonialism you know with that kind in
thews II Azzam that kind of zealotry
there's no way in the world that the
French are gonna kill off a guerrilla
movement because it's going to result in
a war of attrition you will never get
the French population in Paris
to support that kind of a war that's why
I predict that they will lose and so
that had a tremendous effect on
Kennedy's whole view of the Cold War
because I think up until that point
Kennedy was more or less a moderate in
the Democratic Party on that whole issue
that meeting radicalized Kennedy on this
whole issue of the third world because
he now began to see it as this is not
really about democracy versus communism
it's really about independence versus
imperialism and the United States had to
stand for something more than
anti-communism in the third world
you know in a practical sense or else we
were gonna lose these colonial wars and
so Kennedy now began to map out this
whole new foreign policy that and you
know and I'm not exaggerating very much
when I say this that no other politician
in Congress had at that time I don't
know of any other politician senator or
congressman that early 1951 92 to that
began to pronounce these statements that
Kennedy is going to go on with for six
years he's going to be preaching this
that it's not the Democrats that are
wrong it's not the Republicans that are
wrong both parties are wrong on this we
have to understand that in the third
world you know we have to be on this
side of Independence nationalism is a
kind of emotion a kind of psyche that's
not going to be defeated here we have to
understand them
so when Saigon when when dim band foo
fell in 1954 Kennedy was on the floor
saying that it doesn't matter how much
man how much material we put in this is
not going to work direct American
invention is not going to work operation
vulture is not going to work okay no
matter what all right and then that
culminated with his great speech in 1957
on the floor of the Senate about the
French colonial war in Algeria and I
advise anybody if you want to see you
JFK really was read that speech it's in
that book the strategy appease the
entire speech and in that one he
essentially says look we saw this happen
three years ago in Indochina and now
it's repeating itself in the north coast
of Africa you know how much how many
times we have to go through this to
understand what the heck is happening
here if we were the real friends of
France we would not be sending them
weapons to fight this colonial war with
what would we be doing instead is we be
convincing them to go to the negotiating
table
and exit finding a gentlemanly way to
get out of this thing so that not only
can they spare the bloodshed but they
can save a civil war in their own
country over this and so that speech in
the summer of 1957 that speech was so
radical it was so revolutionary that if
I remember correctly there were 165
editorial comments about it throughout
half the newspapers in the United States
have two major newspapers in the United
States comment on it two-thirds of them
were negative that's how far ahead of
the Kirby was two-thirds of them were
negative because his office clipped all
the newspapers he had a clipping service
and Kennedy was really stunned by this
did I make a mistake here and he he
wrote his father saying you know dad I
might have miscalculated on this thing
I'm getting hammered in the press and
his father wrote back to him and said
you don't know how lucky you are because
two years from now when this thing gets
even worse and everything you predicted
turns out to be true you're gonna be the
darling of the Democratic Party that's
exactly what happened so when Kennedy
comes into the White House and this is
where I have a disagreement with a lot
of people in the critical community
including people like John Newman even
Jim Douglas my view of it is that by
1961 Kennedy enters the White House he
already has the gestalt idea of what his
foreign policy is gonna be and a big
part of that is that I'm gonna do
everything I can not to intervene
military power in the third world
whether it be Cuba whether it be Vietnam
so when the debates come in the fall of
1961 when everybody in the room is
telling them you've got to send ground
troops into South Vietnam or the
country's gonna fall McNamara if you can
believe it McNamara was even worse than
McGeorge Bundy he wanted 200,000 men to
be sent into South Vietnam so Kennedy as
is described in many books a very good
one is James blights book virtual JFK he
spent
forty pages discussing those debates in
which Kennedy is the only guy in the
room virtually the only guy in the room
who's resisting all of it and saying
this was a during Kennedy in Johnson see
Kennedy was not a domineering kind of a
personality you know he was he would
encourage his advisors to say what they
thought
whereas Johnson would would use every
trick in the rhetorical trick in the
book to steer everything to go his way
you know he'd use ridicule sarcasm
all right etc well Kennedy wasn't like
that and so he left us the bacon one and
finally after about two weeks you know
he said no we're not we're not going to
go ahead and commit ground troops in the
Vietnam for a number of reasons number
one we're not going to be able to go get
anybody to Ally ourselves with we're
gonna have to go this alone secondly
it's a very very hard thing to
understand it's not like the Korea
situation where you had a North Korean
invasion come across the border this is
much more of a civil war and you know
the the mass of congressmen let alone
the public is not gonna be able to
understand it you know and third how do
you send in infantry division's and
artillery divisions to fight a war in
the jungles of Indochina and of course
those all ended up being accurate so he
did go ahead and increase the number of
risers he sent in 15,000 advisors but
right after this and this is something
that people like David Halberstam
in his incredibly bad book the best from
the brightest they'd shrug this off in a
sentence right after this he tells John
Kenneth Galbraith is the ambassador to
India I want you to go ahead and go into
Saigon and I want you to write me a
report on what you think is going on
there and if you think the United States
should go in there with you know combat
troops and the whole Armada knowing of
course that Galbreath thinks it's a
stupid idea you know so that was meant
to counteract the report that Rostow and
Taylor had brought back to him in which
gun under debate so he gets his report
sits on it for a while
when Galbreath comes into town in April
1962 he tells him take your report on
Vietnam and bring it to McNamara and
tell him it's from me and so that's what
Galbreath did and he wrote back to can
be saying or I did what you asked me to
do and McNamara's on board and this is
how number one kennedy finally got an
ally in his own cabinet you know to
share his view of vietnam and McNamara
now becomes a spearhead for what's going
to be Kennedy's withdrawal plan that is
that's the beginning of Kennedy's plan
to withdraw from South Vietnam now just
to I mean just to go into some of the
Kennedy wasn't doing nothing in Vietnam
did he set up the things like the
strategic Hamlet's and he carried on the
war to some degree right but not with
American troops correct she would but
candy what I think Kennedy was trying to
do he was essentially running a kind of
two track program he wanted to see if
this a more expansive advisory aid would
do any good is the problem that we're
not giving Saigon enough aid to counter
the Russian and Chinese aid being given
to Hanoi is that the problem what he
decided to do was number one to try and
expand the aid to Saigon and at the same
time he if that doesn't work he's also
planning it was draw from Saigon see
Kennedy's idea was this we could go
ahead and help the people we are alive
with we could give them money we can
give them supplies we can give them
weapons we can send in trainers but we
can't fight the war for them we can't do
that and by the way he quite literally
said that dish Schlesinger if we do that
then we're gonna end up like the French
and I saw that
we can't we can't make it into a white
man's war that's by the way that's what
he literally said you know we can't make
it into a white man's war or we'll be
recognized as that by the native
population and so on the one hand he's
trying to give them extended help and on
the other hand he's planning withdraw in
case that doesn't work and and there's
one other element here I'm kind of kind
of glad you asked me that question
there's one other element here there is
the 1964 election see as john newman
said in his groundbreaking book JFK and
Vietnam the best way to explain that to
men in perspective in relation to to
Vietnam was that Kennedy was planning
his withdraw plan around the 1964
election Johnson was planning his
escalation plan around the 1964 election
and that is and everything we've had
remember John wrote his book I think it
was published in 1992 which is 25 years
ago and everything we've had has come
out of the archives since then has
supported a he's absolutely right about
that that whole issue and Kennedy
actually said that to Kenny O'Donnell
and Dave powers I'm gonna be damned as
an appeaser by everybody on the right
after the election but we better win the
election because that's what I'm gonna
do and so it was those three things it
was the the trying help the people we
were were allied with as much as we
could number two planning for what's
wrong in case that doesn't work and in
timing it around that 1964 election I
think those are three things we have to
understand about the Kennedy
administration his approach to the war
so then can you walk us through the
assassination of diem i'ma Kennedy want
to make such a drastic change at that
one glad you asked me that question
because there's some new information on
that which of course everybody is
ignored I mean I haven't seen any
mention of this in any media outlet
whether it be the mainstream press or
the so-called alternative press and what
I'm talking about is the top secret
church committee interview with Bill
Kolbe which I think was 1974-1975 Colby
was first of all he was stationed in
Vietnam up until I think 1961 and then
he became the CIA is chief of the Far
East which of course made in the top
officer in that in that area let me go
ahead and sketch in the background
there's two things we have to understand
about what happened with the coup
attempt against dam and his brother
which culminated in November early
November of 1963 first of all as time
goes on diem and especially his brother
knew began to be more and more
tyrannical about any dissent in South
Vietnam so that what happens is time
goes on and the success of the Vietcong
gets more and more strong is that the
dissent now begins to pour into the
cities and it comes in in a way through
the Buddhist demonstrations which begin
to be by late 1962 early 1963 begin to
be pretty massive and so new who was in
charge of the secret police in Saigon
now decides to crack down on these
demonstrations that's that's one element
the second element is that as the war
begins to be more obviously a losing
proposition by about late 1962 it
becomes clear to a lot of people I think
including Kennedy and certain elements
in the State Department that is Harriman
Mike Forrestal and Roger Hillsman that
this new support that Kennedy's giving
isn't doing very much good we're not
getting very much results compared to
what we're the amount of money and
supplies and advisers we have there and
so what happens is turn on for the press
and I'm talking about David Halberstam
and Neil Sheehan they get together with
one of the advisors that stationed there
John Paul ban and they begin to write
stories about how Kennedy's not doing
enough we're not doing enough to win
this war then what happens the key event
is the battle adapt back which i think
is in January of 1963 we're a heavily
supported force of I think to South
Vietnamese battalion
loses to a much smaller I think a
regiment of Vietcong supplemented by
North Vietnamese regulars even though
the South Vietnamese had helicopter
gunship support and they still lost well
Roger Hillsman was in country at that
time and he read up on this thing and he
begins and the only way you can call
this is a cabal within the State
Department that begins to plot to get
rid of James government they're
convinced by now that diem cannot win
this war
you know he's that we picked the wrong
guy and so they hatch a plot that when
everybody is out of Washington there was
a weekend I think in August the third
yeah but I think the third weekend of
August when Kennedy has decided to
change ambassadors he wanted to bring
gully in' and desai gan dean rusk
rejected that and Rusk picked Lodge
Henry Cabot Lodge while this is going on
they essentially run a con job on
Kennedy on a weekend knowing everybody's
out of town and they tell him that all
of his advisers including John McCone
the new CIA director have agreed to send
an ultimatum to Jim you have to get rid
of your brother you have to grant more
democratic rights or we're gonna side
with the opposition so they read this
the Kennedy who's up and uh you know my
Anna support and and Kennedy Kennedy
said and McCombs on board with this and
and he goes yeah well datings show it to
McComb they deliberately lied to Kennedy
and that's why Kennedy had a hard time
because he knew that McComb was a big DM
backer so they deceived him that's the
first are part of the plot the second
part of the plot was that Lodge did not
go to them and counsel him first as to
what the plan was he went directly to
the generals who wanted to overthrow him
with with the Telex it's called the
cable when Kennedy comes back to
Washington and he discovers what's
happened he's arias you know he starts
slamming tedesco this [ __ ] has got to
stop and Forrestal who had been part of
the plot you know he offered his
resignation and Kennedy says very coldly
you're not worth firing you know you owe
me something now okay and
so Kennedy cancels the order and Cabot
Lodge on that 1983 PBS special which is
much better than the Burns Novick one he
admits getting that cancellation order
and so the new evidence we have now is
that bill Colby told the Senate in this
private session which I don't think this
has ever been out there before he said
that the generals backed away from the
overthrow attempt for a couple of months
and he then added that it's when the
export-import bank canceled dm's credits
which I think was a month or two after
that that they decided to go ahead
because to them that told them that GM
didn't have any more support from the
business community at all if you want to
see how important that is if you go to
Jim Douglas book he talks about that
meeting in which his CIA representative
at the meeting they were having a
meeting about Vietnam and he suddenly
intended he's talking about the the
financial support we're giving them and
the CIA guy at the meeting says words
the effect sir that's been cancelled and
Kennedy says I didn't cancel it because
I know you didn't cancel it because it's
automatically cancelled at a certain
level and Kennedy gets very angry and he
says do you know what you've done now
and the guys doesn't say anything
because Kennedy knew it was going to
happen and that's the event that Kobe
says that recharged a plot to overthrow
diem so when Kennedy found out about
this he tried to send a private emissary
to Jim to get at him and his brother out
of the city he didn't listen to him and
so then instead he made a terrible
mistake Jim made a terrible mistake and
he decided to work with lodge when they
started laying siege to the presidential
palace and I can't recommend there's no
better chronicle of this than what's in
Jim Douglass's book JFK any unspeakable
because I think between that between the
chapter and Newman's book and what Kobe
said in this private session with the
Church Committee I think it's pretty
clear I don't think and prove this
beyond a reasonable doubt but I think
you can prove it beyond what they call a
preponderance of the evidence I think is
pretty clear that Lodge and the de facto
had the sea
station lucien Kunene because lodge had
gotten rid of the actual CIA station
chief because he figured he favored them
too much and him and conan because jim
was calling lodge thinking that he was
gonna help him get out of saigon really
lodge was relaying those messages to
Kunene who was in communication with the
generals and so when DM comes out of
that church thinking he's gonna have a
limousine to the airport it's really the
generals who greet him and they and they
essentially assassinate him in the back
of the truck and that death and kennedy
was so furious about this when he heard
about this he walked out of the meeting
with taylor pounding his teeth and then
his what he told Forrestal that he was
going to recall lodge for the purposes
of firing him and then they were going
to have a huge meeting that we're gonna
go ahead and educate everybody about how
the hell we got into this mess because
he was gonna try and educate them to his
point of view well what happens of
course is that Kenny's assassinated in
Dallas Johnson becomes president and he
doesn't fire a lodge
he keeps lodge there and instead of
educating them to Kennedy's point of
view at the very first meeting it's very
clear that Johnson is going to instead
of getting out of the war he's
determined not to lose the war and then
of course everything changes you know
and in a period of just a matter of
months because as many officers have
noted Johnson's point of view about this
whole thing was diametrically opposed to
Kennedy and it went all the way back to
1961 where he actually used sent to
Saigon and a goodwill tour and he
actually told diem to ask Kennedy for
military and troops at that time in 1961
so everything everything changes very
quickly once Kennedy's assassinated the
once Johnson takes over can you just
kind of give us some of the numbers how
many soldiers to hide in Vietnam by the
time Kennedy was assassinated how many
advisers were there I mean the Lord
didn't really get started until what we
think of it as until pretty far into
Johnson's administration's all right the
war doesn't really begin in a real sense
until Johnson wins the election
in 1919 64 once he does that then about
three months later there begins to be a
big Air Force buildup a bombing build-up
and then ground troops begin to arrive
in 1965 at Danang to complement a big
air build-up that's gonna take place by
the time when Kennedy is killed
there is something like 15,000 advisers
American advisers know combat troops go
in Vietnam and I think at that time
there had been all the way through from
Eisenhower to Kennedy I think there are
about a hundred and thirty five American
fatalities in Vietnam so it's it's it's
miniscule is when it's all over of
course you're gonna have 58,000 dead
American troops about 300,000 casualties
you know on top of that you're gonna
have the greatest you know air bombing
campaign in the history of mankind
Rolling Thunder under Johnson and then a
continuance of that you know especially
over Laos and Cambodia by Nixon there's
gonna be more bombs dropped over
Indochina then the Allies dropped during
the entire World War two
what do you what do you think next you
could kind of go into the insam itself
if you're interested in that or we could
go on into the Johnson's part of the war
one of the things the big problems I had
with the Byrnes Novick program was that
the stretch of time between Kennedy's
assassination which was of course in
November of 63 until the Gulf of Tonkin
incident was very much under plate first
of all there was no mention of NCM 263
which is unbelievable really kind of
shocking because in Sam 263 of course
was Kennedy's order that officially
began but draw program and that would
draw program actually began in May of
1962 be implemented the implementation
part began in May of 1963 when McNamara
met with all of the CIA State Department
Pentagon advisors from Vietnam at a
meeting in Honolulu called the SEC def
conference and at that meeting he
demanded everybody bring with
their schedules for getting out of
Vietnam and when he was presented with
those schedules he said this is too slow
we have to speed this up which is a very
curious comment which no one has really
been said anything about and I think the
reason that McNamara said that one of
the most important declassified
documents that came out since the
closure of the ARB was and Malcom blunt
the wonderful British researcher found
this and he sent it to me is that candy
ordered an evacuation plan for South
Vietnam which had just been returned to
him the first week of November and John
Neumann and my talks with him and said
that McNamara and Kennedy were worried
that Saigon would fall before the
withdrawal was completed in other words
Kennedy had mapped out his withdrawal
program from late 1963 to the middle of
1965 okay it would be completed by that
time proxy a thousand troops a month but
they worried that Saigon would not be
able to hold out and so I think that's
why Kennedy ordered that evacuation plan
once that's in place once our McNamara
has made it clear to the people in
Saigon that the United States is getting
out then Kennedy then goes ahead and
gathers his advisors in October of 1963
and he pre writes the McNamara Taylor
report that report was not written by
McNamara Taylor it was written by Victor
Krulak and Fletcher Prouty
under the direction of bobby kennedy
under the orders of jack kennedy okay so
the series the Novick Byrne series
didn't mention any of this about n Sam
263 or about the writing by the Kennedy
brothers of the of the Taylor Mac u
memory report what happens next of
course is that Johnson essentially
passes in Sam 273 which had been drafted
to him for him at this Honolulu
conference you know at which Kennedy
said when these guys get back you know
we're gonna have a long discussion about
how the heck we ever got into Vietnam
and so then he rewrites this and he
orders three very important revisions in
the rough draft at McGeorge Bundy had
written
one of them was that they would be able
to use American naval equipment to raid
the north coast of Vietnam and the other
two were to make it easier to do
Special Forces cross-border operations
in the Cambodia and Laos so in other
words what you were gonna have now was
the beginning of the Gulf of Tonkin
incident because South Vietnam didn't
have any Navy you couldn't do those
raids coupled with the destroyer
communications missions at what they
call the DeSoto patrols which is gonna
result in the Gulf of Tonkin incident
and second of all this now spread the
war across the borders into Laos and
Cambodia which Kennedy really didn't
want to do or he wanted to keep see a
nuke in Cambodia and he wanted to try
and keep Laos neutral if you can believe
it and by now you can the burns and
Novick series doesn't mention NCM 273
and how it reversed Kennedy's policies
so then after the election when Johnson
then is elected president in this
landslide in which he campaigned
essentially on that we're not going to
send American boys to fight a war that
Asian boys are he uses his incident in
the Tonkin Gulf as a war declaration
because you know I'll do I'm gonna go
over that just very brief because he
everybody listening to this understands
was talking golfing's and it was it was
these patrols that I mentioned these
raids by the South Vietnamese Army on
these American sponsored patrol ships
all right and they were coupled with
American destroyers decked out with
high-tech communications equipment to
find radar spots and communication spots
along the north coast of Vietnam after
Tonkin Gulf and they were clearly I mean
even George ball you know who worked for
Johnson in the State Department and even
McGeorge Bundy said that they were
designed as provocations and so when the
North Vietnamese went ahead and
counter-attack the raids they actually
put one machine gun bullet into one of
the Destroyers halls then of course a
so-called
an attack which never really happened
that was enough for Johnson to use as a
way to attack the north which is by the
way what he wanted to do since March of
nineteen since March of nineteen sixty
sixty four when he signed and Sam 288
which more or less reversed in Sam 263
and which mapped out certain targets
that we would use and so he sends these
airplane jet sorties in the North
Vietnam bombing petroleum refineries and
also Navy Navy Yard ships and I think it
was something like at least 65 sorties
two guys were shot down one was killed
one was taken prisoner and that's
signaled to Hanoi that Johnson planned
to go to war in Vietnam
jiya actually admitted towards the end
of his life through his son that he
understood Kennedy was a drawing at the
end of 1963 this new signal told the
north to start planning for a war
because Johnson's attitude was
completely different and that of course
is what happened once Johnson won the
landslide election then very shortly
after that he began to militarize this
over by the way I should say Bobby
Kennedy's protests you know there's a
really nice book out called by a guy
named John Bohr called the revolution of
Robert Kennedy where the for the first
time that I know of it's revealed that
Bobby Kennedy did not agree with what
Johnson was doing and he did not agree
as early as 1964 I mean everybody says
it's 1967 but that was only when Bobby
Kennedy did is in public privately he
was trying to discourage Johnson from
militarizing the war but that's what
Johnson and his intent was and so in
early 1965 he begins to send all kind of
bombing planes in the South Vietnam I
think about 90 some bombers come over
from Thailand and then of course if
you're going to put all these bomber
planes in there
the Vietcong are going to raid them
which they did and so then that was the
excuse for sending in the first American
combat troops I think there was
something like 5,000 when I sure add an
egg in
think April of 1965 and then that
increased amazingly by the end of the
year if you can believe it by the end of
there's 175,000 combat troops in the
country
amazing escalation and Operation Rolling
Thunder which is like I said the biggest
bombing campaign the world has ever seen
you know and you gotta wonder I mean
what the hell is here to bomb you know
you reason you bombed Germany or Japan
because there was an industrial base
that supplied the war machines of both
countries but how the heck can you bomb
rice fields and palm trees now there
really wasn't a heck of a lot of
industrial base in in North Vietnam to
bomb or in South Vietnam you know and so
you of course you ended up killing a
heck of a lot of civilians and by the
way I should add that when I did some
research on this the numbers I found go
way beyond what the Defense Department
admitted I found a study that was made
by a British Medical Group that how she
went to Vietnam today and they went
ahead in the interview they went
door-to-door you know which is the way
you're supposed to do the PT model
epidemiology of worker you know work on
this you know you want to actually try
and talk to people in the field and they
asked them how many members your family
did you lose when it was all over you
know meaning to anything not just
bombing but also stepping on mines and
things like that and they came to the
rather astonishing figure these revised
figures that between both the military
casualties and the civilian casualties
that the number is four million which is
amazing in a country of 35 million
people which means that about one tenth
of the population was killed during this
this crazy senseless
nutty war and and let me add that see
this is one of the reasons Kennedy did
not want to send combat troops in
because he says you know how do you
fight an enemy that is both everywhere
and nowhere and at the same time has a
support of the people how do you send
American combat troops in
to fight that kind of a war Johnson in
Westmoreland who was the guy who must
warlin was a general that Johnson chose
to be the commanding officer in Vietnam
they didn't seem to understand that you
and so they never they never came to a
kind of tactical and strategic decision
about how to fight the war except to try
and overpower the enemy with this
terrific artillery fire you know and air
power and it didn't work and all did was
essentially kill a lot of civilians not
win over the population for us in fact
it did the opposite and it bombed to
smithereens the beautiful ecology of
that country and so this went on 65 66
and 67 by this time the United States
has something like five hundred and
twenty-five thousand combat troops and
by the way when I say that figure once
Johnson made his decision to escalate
he asked the Joint Chiefs of Staff he
said tell me how many man it's gonna
take and how long to win this war and
they actually told him they said five
hundred thousand men five to ten years
to do it and so Johnson finally hit the
five hundred thousand men you know in
1967 1968 around that time
five hundred thousand combat troops in
the country and it still didn't work and
the horrible thing of course is that as
it didn't work the American army began
to collapse began to fall apart
internally because they knew there
really wasn't any plan to win the war
there really wasn't a plan to win the
war and so Colonel Robert heinel wrote a
wonderful article in which he described
us to collapse the American army and
Indochina and he reported all the drug
abuse because in addition to not being
able to win the war the United States
got involved through the CIA Air America
which is Golden Triangle opium trade in
which vice president key president too
knew about it and vice president key was
a part of it when by the way burns and
Novick don't mention that at all and
what happened is that many of these
soldiers either began to smoke pot or do
heroin and then it got to be a business
you know it began to be refined because
you refine opium into heroin and that
began to shift to Marseille you know a
great French seaport on the
Mediterranean and then some that got
into the United States and there's been
reports that some of it came in on the
body bags of dead American soldiers I'm
not positive that happened but I've seen
reports that have happened there was a
report that Hoover talked about it and
one of his memos all right but I've
never actually seen the memo that's how
bad this thing got as the American army
began to collapse and then of course
began what the military called fragging
see as the American soldiers began to
see that there was no way to win this
war they began to do two things they
began to take it out on the civilian
population by slaughtering many unarmed
civilians and then also by taking it out
on their commanding officers so if they
got a mission message the night before
that they knew was hopeless instead of
going through a de mission they would
just go ahead and toss a grenade and the
commanding officers cabin and there were
numerous heinel in his article you know
said that I think it's from 1969 to 1971
there were well over 200 instances of
that happening in Vietnam you know you
can't run an army I don't have to tell
anybody including uh you know even
people who want to defend this war to
this day
and there's still some people who do
that you can't run an army like that you
can't run an army you got that many
people mutiny so the American army began
to collapse and then of course you had
the Tet Offensive the Tet Offensive took
place at the beginning of 1968 and at a
time when Johnson and Westmoreland were
saying that there's light at the end of
the tunnel well the massive size and
scope of the Tet Offensive in which a
Vietcong raided almost every major city
in South Vietnam it
she actually had Vietcong inside the
American Embassy in Saigon and there was
a famous picture and burns and Novick
didn't show this picture there's a
famous picture of an American diplomat
shooting a handgun at a Vietcong rebel
running through the courtyard that
picture got published in Life magazine
you know when the American people so we
can't even defend our own American
Embassy in Saigon and like I said the
these raids took place all throughout
South Vietnam you know from the northern
part to the southern part and so that
showed the American public that we
weren't winning the war and Johnson
refused to say to admit this so at a
famous meeting after the Tet Offensive
he called in his advisors and he called
in some elder statesmen like Bob Lovett
and and Dean Acheson and he brought in
the Pentagon to try and explain how the
United States did not lose tests we
actually won because we killed so many
more the enemy than they killed a bus
and Acheson walked out when Johnson
called them up later said why did you
walk out Dean and I said I'm not gonna
listen to these crap anymore
I'm not gonna listen to some
commissioned officer coming over and
giving me the message the Pentagon wants
to deliver I actually want to see the
raw reports and so that began to turn
Johnson around and then he sent a couple
weeks later he sent a new secretary the
president cuz Maxim Erin quit by now one
by one all the Kennedy people quit
Pierre Salinger John McCone McGeorge
Bundy George ball and then McNamara one
by one they all left and so he appointed
his own Secretary of Defense Clark
Clifford he went over the Pentagon and
he's talked about this on more than one
occasion and he said when I started
these interviews I was a hawk after two
weeks of asking these guys questions
based on the documents they gave me I
realized that I had made a terrible
mistake today I have no problem saying
that I could not have been more wrong
about Vietnam and so at the end of that
two-week review he went back to Johnson
and he said there's no way we're gonna
win this
my best advice to you is to get out of
this thing
that's when Johnson went on TV I think
was the end of March 1968 and he shocked
the country and said he was not going to
run again as you devote the rest of his
time to trying to get a peace treaty in
Vietnam 68 cents an important here can
you just just give us a little
chronology of the assassinations the
riots in Chicago and these other things
you were talking about 1968 is one of
the most I mean the call it pivotal
doesn't do it justice it's really epical
because you know you had so many key
events happening in that one year that
there's no way around it
they individually they change the shape
of history put it together they
completely shifted history around are
you in so in in the beginning of 1968 of
course you had the Tet Offensive that
leads to Johnson going on the air and
saying he's not gonna run again which
was a shock to everybody then a week
later you had the assassination of
Martin Luther King in Memphis just a
week later then you had McCarthy and
Bobby Kennedy both running for president
and slowly but surely you know Bobby
Kennedy takes the lead and then it looks
like that he's gonna win the nomination
because he won this great victory in
California the GNAT night which i think
is almost exactly one month after no no
excuse me two months after King is
assassinated then Bobby Kennedy's
assassinated and in many ways in many
ways anybody who studies history should
be able to tell you this with a death of
Bobby Kennedy you really I don't think
it's exaggerating this at all you really
had to death the sixties that was it
with him when all the hopes and the
dreams and the aspirations whether
well-founded or not of that whole
generation of people who really wanted
to see the the promises the new frontier
the promises of the civil rights
movement you know the promises of a new
approach to foreign policy
you know the promises of a more
equitable country that was a
/ with his death and and that's what
made it so shocking now and so that led
to the Chicago Convention and at that
convention you essentially had what was
the RFK King wing of the Democratic
Party led by all those young people and
people's people of color protesting
against the Richard Daley Lyndon Johnson
wing of the Democratic Party
you had that split that was dramatized
by the violence which I think most
people who studied that that was really
a planned attack by Daley who wanted to
put down this uprising he saw and so it
was really kind of a street battle which
the network's really didn't do a heck of
a good job broadcasting but there's been
a lot of private pictures taken of what
those cops were doing to those kids it
was really a brutal and it leaked over
into the convention we had Abraham
Ribicoff a Kennedy guy looking right out
daily and saying if George McGovern won
this thing because McGovern was a guy
they put up at the last minute in place
of Bobby Kennedy you represent the
Robert Kennedy wing of the party okay
you know we we wouldn't have these
Gestapo tactics you know in the streets
of Chicago and you can see daily you can
read his lips and he says you know f you
all right so you had the Democratic
Party splitting apart at that convention
and then of course you had Nixon and
I've said this more than once
you know Nixon essentially hijacked
Johnson's peace plan because when he
began to perceive this as a way that
Johnson was gonna become the peace
president and win the election for
Hubert Humphrey his vice president who
after Kennedy was killed won the
nomination in Chicago and so he
sabotaged quite literally there's no
other way around is the evidence today
is overwhelming that he sabotage the
peace talks that Johnson was trying to
sponsor by having an emissary Madame
Chennault the wife of Claire Chennault
you know and Bo dam who was
president two's ambassador in Washington
they told President to not to cooperate
with Johnson's peace plan if they held
out they would get a better deal from
Nixon what's important to remember about
that to see you have to really
understand how treacherous Nixon was you
know and I don't think the birds no book
special god of the cross at the same
time Nixon is doing this and having
Chennault and diem report that John
Mitchell you know who's gonna be his
attorney general and who is his campaign
manager he knows about the meeting of
Lovett and axon and Clark Clifford in
Washington took place in January in
February and he tells people working on
his speeches literally he says because
he's heard about that meeting and he
says you know we know the war can't be
won but we can't let on to that we have
to make like it can be won to have more
leverage in the campaign so here's a guy
who knows the Vietnam War is lost
sabotages Johnson attempt to end it for
pure political purposes and man once he
becomes president due to this because
see on the eve of the election I think
four or five days before the election
presidents who made a 27 minute speech
and by the way burns and no book don't
tell you this either
he made a 27 minute speech in Saigon
that was carried by all three networks
back in those days you had ABC NBC and
CBS and if you had those three everybody
that country's watching because that's
all there was
except for PBS which had a very small
audience and so they all televised to
speech in which he made it clear that he
was not going to cooperate with
Johnson's plan because he proceeded as a
sellout to South Vietnam and even people
who worked for Nixon said that that's
Beach won the election for him because
he and Humphrey was coming on very
strong okay in in October and that
speech put put the stop to Humphries
rally and so that's that's what happened
in 1968 and that's how Nixon became
president
I mean it was in it was an unbelievable
mind-boggling year and it all happened
in the space of a matter of months and
that's what put Richard Nixon in the
White House and it's a bloody shame what
happened as a result of that because
even though Nixon passed a Nixon and
Kissinger passed the paper around the
first week they were in the White House
it's called NSM 1 which means national
study national security study memorandum
and they wanted to know what people
thought about the foreign policy
apparatus what people thought about the
Vietnam War and Johnson had replaced
Westmoreland with Creighton Abrams at
this time and even Creighton Abrams and
his response said words of the effect
that in my opinion you cannot win a
military victory you know all you have
is a stalemate here so in other words
knowing that the best he could do was
get a long stalemate and knowing the
American people will never stand for
that Nixon began to expand the air war
into Laos and Cambodia and for political
purposes he then began to draw down the
number of troops there so in other words
you were doing a balancing act
you were you were getting out American
combat troops trying to turn the war
over to South Vietnam and at the same
time you're increasing and expanding the
focus of the air war and what that did
of course is it destabilized Cambodia
and Laos when and we on had to tell
anybody what happened in Cambodia
because once the air war began to rain
down it began to help the Chinese
Marxist rebels you know led by Pol Pot
you know I shouldn't say that because
most people if you try and classify who
Pol Pot was nobody really knows what the
heck he was he he seemed to be like an
agrarian revolutionary who wanted to
empty the whole cities out and you know
bring him to the countryside in a crazy
you know restructuring in society and so
as the bombing campaign picked up pop
pots forces strengthen and then
when scnic brought brought in his prime
minister lon NOLA military guy when he
went on vacation lon Knoll staged a coup
when he of course long known encouraged
Nixon because you were keep on what they
were doing and the country got
destabilized even more and the bombing
went inland what happened of course was
this build-up Paul Potts forces until he
was able to lay siege to lawn Knowles
new government all right was just a
horrible horrible situation that
resulted and so this went on this
expansion of the war
Nixon knowing that he really can't win
but trying to find a way to get the best
agreement he can and at the same time
he's polarizing and deceiving the public
in America he's gonna sell out president
to because once he realizes that he
can't win the war he also knows he has
to get out before the election or else
people are gonna ask him where other
actions mean he has to arrange to have
the defeat come after the election or
people are gonna say you know you kept
us here for four years for nothing and
so he begins to create something called
the decent interval and the decent
interval is something that both Nixon
and Kissinger lied about in both their
books in Nixon's book no more Viet Nam's
in Kissinger his book the White House
years they deny did this thing existed
but it did exist weak in fact Kissinger
even wrote about it in his notebooks he
took over to China not to be fair for
Nixon's is to China and he talked about
it was Ellen Lai and Zhou Enlai
communicated that the North Vietnam and
a decent interval was this concept
Saigon could fall but it had to fall
after the American troops were gone
because then we could blame it on
President to and the South Vietnamese
army and wouldn't be blamed on us that
that's how it retro steez guys work
that's how bad these guys were the
countless tons of bombs and by the way
Nixon dropped more bombs in Indochina
than Johnson did and it was by a wide
margin just so he could ensure that he
when in 1972 election and humiliate they
these guys hated what they perceived as
of liberal media and leftist
intellectuals and so that's what they
were doing that's what they were doing
that's what they did it for that's what
it went on for and so what happens of
course is that there's the Easter
offensive in the spring of 72 in which
which would have ten undoubtedly taken
the country over at that time it was a
massive tank attack from the north but
then Nixon and Kissinger called in the
American Air Force from as far away as
Thailand and that stopped the Easter
offensive and then when Nixon thought he
had a peace agreement in the fall of
1972 and Kissinger brought the agreement
back to president - and president - went
into a rage because he looked at it and
only mentioned three countries in
Indochina Cambodia Laos and Vietnam
you know we're essentially saying we
know it's all over and we know the
country is going to be united together
with you know with the north and you're
not going to be a part of it so and so
choose flew into a rage and Kissinger
couldn't handle and so he let him write
out a list of demands and he brought the
demands back to lead up to-- who was
negotiator in Paris with Kissinger and
it was a list of 60 demands and so he
says leader throw says look I can't
settle every one of these one-on-one
with you I've got to take him back to
hanaway and I have to discuss a few of
them with to pull a bureau there and so
Kissinger didn't want to admit that he
wasn't making any headway because Nixon
has already relieved Kissinger of his
duties with - and he appointed Alexander
Haig to run that and so he said that the
North Vietnamese were being deliberately
belligerent and so Nixon ordered the
Christmas bombing which went on for
something like 13 days and the North was
so outraged by then this is a mythology
on what people like the military that
says somehow that it was the Christmas
bombing that brought Lee docto back to
the negotiating table first of all Lee
tiptoe is going to return
to the negotiating table anyway what
Nixon did that for was a try and show
president too that he would use American
military power if there was any
violations of the agreement that's what
that was for
and then Hanoi got so angry but they
didn't want to return to the negotiating
table Nixon had to ask them to come back
and they didn't want to come back the
Chinese had to convince him to go back
they basically said look Nixon has lost
something like 12 points in his approval
ratings because of that bombing he's in
deep trouble over this Watergate thing
which is not gonna go away so all you
have to do is wait them out and you can
take the whole country cuz they're gonna
have to leave and also Congress had
start cutting funding for the war after
the shootings at Kent State in Jackson
State the Gulf of Tonkin Resolution was
repealed and now you know the Liberals
in Congress and even some Republicans
were so sick of this thing that they
started to cut off the funding for the
war you know the peace movement
accomplished up which of course burns a
nova don't tell you that in their
documentary but they did achieve that
very significant achievement and so Lee
that toe went back to Paris and the
agreements were signed in January of
1973 Nixon's big thing was always peace
with honor well first of all there was
no peace and there was no honor the
fighting continued
each side trying to get an advantage and
there was nothing honorable about it
okay because polarizing the country and
selling out your ally you know at the
same time there's no honor in them
then of course in 1975 Nixon is finally
out of office through the Watergate
scandal like the Chinese predicted and
Kissinger is running the evacuation of
South Vietnam and everybody remembers
the famous image of the American
helicopter at the top of some people say
it's the American Embassy but actually I
think it's a CIA station building
there's a helicopter there with all the
Vietnamese trying to get on the
helicopter and someone who didn't get on
the United States left Jerry Ford and
Kissinger left about five hundred people
there and so
that's the images everybody remembers
about America leaving Vietnam and that
night
Kissinger got on the phone with an old
friend of his from academic circles when
he was in Harvard and said thank God
it's all over we should have never been
there yeah so in other words that's what
he really thought that's what Kennedy
was saying you know we should have never
had American combat troops there we
should have never had this huge military
mission there so you know it always
amazed me that Nixon and Kissinger were
looked up to as he's foreign policy
mavens when in fact they were nothing
but dyed-in-the-wool cold warriors who
you manipulated the Cold War for
political purposes they show you how
stupid Nixon and Kissinger work and the
80s when Gorbachev took over the Soviet
Union after you met with Reagan Reagan
really liked him he thought this guy's a
real reformer and Margaret Thatcher you
know the right wing not from England
actually said we can work with mr.
Gorbachev so Reagan called an Nixon and
he then called in Kissinger and he told
her I think you really work with this
guy I don't think he's I don't think
he's like one of those old hardline
communists apparatchiks and Nixon didn't
believe it
Nixon didn't bleed he told him yes he is
that's how he got the power and then he
told us he was leaving he told his
assistants so whatever you do don't let
Reagan in the same room with Gorbachev
alone and Kissinger said the same thing
how can you be that wrong about two
important things like the Vietnam War
and that great moment in history which
Reagan partly bungled because of the
advice from those two guys so it's
always puzzled me how Nixon and
Kissinger how the mainstream media made
them out to be these foreign policy
gurus
when in fact they were nothing except a
dressed-up John Foster Dulles
I'll take Kennedy any day of the week
right and I you know just from what
happened in Vietnam and just because we
brought a full pot I mean eventually it
was the Vietnamese themselves that had
to go get rid of Pol Pot because like
what they had done so correct correct
correct it desi that's something that
burns a nova don't even touch on the
horrible genocide that took place in
Cambodia because of the Nixon Kissinger
bombing campaign
and when Paul Pott took over God knows
you know I usually go by a million
people but if you go ahead and find that
because there was these there was this
investigation I think a few years ago
this long series of trials and
investigations that went on and they
actually put the figure at much higher
than that they actually put the figure
at about two million not perished by Pol
Pot in Cambodia and you're exactly right
you know it got so horrible in Cambodia
that the North Vietnamese had to go in
and it was them you know they overturned
the Pol Pot you know tyranny not up yeah
when you think about what you just said
with you have Cambodia two million
people you have Vietnam four million
people I don't think you can take out
from this whole thing the Indonesian
massacres of 1965 because it's obvious
that the whole domino theories are you
talking about you know seven million
people in the course of you know I don't
know 20 years no no that all happened
you know I mean the vast amount of
casualties in Vietnam all happened from
about 1966 onward you know and you had
the overthrow Sukarno in 65 alright so
in a period of about what a decade you
know of about a decade you you had the
going by the latest figures the latest
figures I could find when you add in
Vietnam Cambodia and Indonesia
what did you say seven million just
roughly four more units udderly yeah
that's what I would say I would say a
rough estimate would be about seven
million and you know that might be wrong
that might be too high it might be too
low but it's around from the latest
figures I could find the most accurate
figures I could find it's it's about
seven million at the very least it's
five and a half million and and and all
because of the reversals of Kennedy's
policies in both Indochina and in
Indonesia because Kennedy
you know as people who read my website
you know and are keep up on you know
Greg pull grains work that the wonderful
scholar on Indonesia from Australia you
know Kennedy was backing Sekar know all
the way to the end you know like I'm
talking 1963 and he planned on visiting
Indonesia in 1964 you know Kennedy went
as far as to arrange nationalization
deals for Saqqara because he thought
Sakura was getting screwed by these big
Petroleum [ __ ] companies and so he
actually got on the phone and relayed
his message like you know I want a much
more generous split to go to Indonesia
they wanted like ninety ten in favor of
the company
Kennedy insisted 6040 you know in the
favor of the Indonesian government and
see then that was the whole difference
because we know what happened in India
after you under Johnson you know it just
became a pig out in which thousand tens
of thousands of people hundreds
thousands of people were slaughtered and
Suharto gave the government over to the
big corporations most of them being
Americans let me let's end on this I
want to put Kennedy's policies in
perspective a little bit do you feel
that there's any resemblance between his
idea of what America's foreign policy
should be and what FDR's vision for kind
of the post-war world should have been I
I think I think they're pretty similar
when when I when I look at this you know
and I see what what his for it would
after your as foreign policy was you
know and what he wanted to do with the
Soviet Union and what he wanted to do in
the third world I think they're pretty
much similar Roosevelt wanted to keep
that grand alliance together after the
war that is between the United States
England and the Soviet Union he felt he
controls Stalin at least in the
International fuel and so he wanted to
keep that together after the war and he
tried to understand the Soviet Union's
insecurity about Eastern Europe now in a
third world Roosevelt did not want any
more of the colonialism
you know this brutal colonialism
that actually went in and may the native
peoples even worse off you know than
they were before the colonial state took
over he actually said that to one of his
advisers we can't tolerate a situation
in which native peoples are in worst
conditions after the Europeans come in
and they were before you know and those
two things I think are pretty similar to
what Kennedy's ideas were certainly by
1963 so I in my opinion what you had
here is you had Kennedy trying to go
ahead and turn back American foreign
policy by rebelling it's what the Dulles
brothers had done and restoring it back
to Roosevelt then what you have when
Johnson and then even then Nixon took
over you had essentially the overthrow
of Kennedy's reform policy you know and
you went back to what the Dulles
brothers were and by the way I let me
add one thing why I'm pretty sure about
I'm right about this at one time before
the Byrnes Novik series came on I was
gonna do a very long two-part essay for
Kennedy's and King and this was going to
be my central idea you know I was gonna
go ahead and demonstrate because most
authors all they do is compare Kennedy
with Johnson what did Johnson do to
Kennedy's foreign policy I was gonna
take it all the way through the Nixon
and Kissinger and I was gonna do it in
four central areas Vietnam Pakistan and
India Indonesia and the Middle East and
so I actually spent a lot of time on
this you know I'm about
I said percent about four months doing
research on it and then when the burns
Nova thing came on I said well I can do
it this way you know I can do it which
is focusing on this and this is gonna be
a big media event so more people
probably read this if I just focused it
on Vietnam but I did do the preliminary
research and so I'm pretty sure that I'm
right about this that that was a
historical contour that Kennedy was
going back to Roosevelt and then after
Kennedy was assassinated Johnson and
Nixon went back to Dulles they repealed
almost all the good things that Kennedy
had done and they went back to more or
less at Dulles eyes and
our paradigm and and let me to complete
that thought to show you how bad it got
once Nixon left office and Jerry Ford
you know mr. Warren Commission cover-up
took over he brought in Rumsfeld and
Cheney you know and those eye those guys
thought that Kissinger was too moderate
and you can believe it they thought he
was too moderate and that was the
beginning that was a historical
beginning of the neocon movement a
neoconservative movement that eventually
swept through Washington and that was
the complete elimination and destruction
of whatever was left of Kennedy's
foreign policy once those guys took
power because we saw what happened first
with the Reagan administration and then
with both the bushes they did so much
damage to the American image abroad that
I don't I don't really honestly I don't
think you can salvage it anymore in my
opinion that's what happened
you know Kennedy's foreign policy today
is essentially in a museum you know it's
it's dead and buried and you can study
it for historical purposes but that
series of events from Johnson to Nixon
to Ford spelled the end of that kind of
view of American foreign policy
throughout the world it's it's sort of
like that book that Kennedy likes so
much
the ugly American you know did you know
that that he was a big fan of that book
yeah it was a kind of a classic back
then it was trying to show how misguided
American fallen form Paul and they made
a movie out of it with Marlon Brando
alright and it was how misguided
American foreign policy was in the third
world and Kennedy liked it so much he
bought a hundred copies and he gave it
to everybody else in the Senate so they
could read it so they would understand
in a fictional form you know what was
happening you know and so you know that
view that America could not be you know
a controller we had to let those peoples
in the third world have a degree of
freedom and democracy for themselves or
we were going to lose you know we were
going to lose
- either fascism or communism that that
was all dad done so it was all dead and
buried then and and and that's what
happened I I sincerely believe that that
was the case from the work I did on this
can you give a couple list of books if
people want to dig more into find out
about Kennedy's foreign problems yeah
okay a really good one I believe is
Robert rakove and it's called Kennedy
Johnson and the non-aligned world ok
betting on the Africans by Philip II
uhlenbeck polkas the third one is an
incubus of intervention to incubus of
intervention by Greg pull grain pou l gr
AI m and the last one is JFK ordeal in
Africa by Richard Mahoney Sarah is there
anything you want to have tagged on at
the end here no I I think we did a
pretty good job of covering it know
there's a lot of information in this
interview that that's not in those
essays you know so I think we did a
pretty good job on it and I got to you
know I got to actually be more explicit
about what my original message was going
to be so that this is a pretty good
interview it great you're such a wealth
of knowledge so it's it's always great
to hear you go over all these things let
me that is that Colby interview is that
in the new JFK releases yes great I did
that up I'll put some links on there but
yeah thanks for talking once again and I
really appreciate you taking the time
[Music]
this is our hidden history
you